# What is sleep nudging?

Sleep nudging is not about shutting down your baby by ignoring their communication. It’s about nudging your child to sleep within their tolerance and not outside of it. It is important that your child feels secure throughout the process. Firstly, says Professor Navaez, do not attempt sleep nudging before your child is six months old. In their first year of life, the social and emotional processing parts of your baby’s brain – in other words, the foundation for their mental health – are wiring up in relationship with your loving interaction. So do not start this process before they are ready. And all babies are different as to when they may be ready.
As I mentioned earlier, babies aren’t born with the capacity to believe that an object still exists when they can’t see it; psychotherapists call this ‘object permanence’. So when they are left alone, they may feel abandoned. Our own sense of people continuing to exist even when we cannot see or hear them is so ingrained it’s easy to overlook that we had to learn it too.
Once a baby does have this sense of ‘object permanence’ – and, again, I’m not going to say when this is, as we all develop at different speeds and it is possible to have the knowledge of permanence cognitively but not feel it on a bodily level until later – it’s easier to begin to nudge for more separation at night.
The first step is to notice where and when your baby feels safe and secure as they fall asleep. This may be going to sleep while breastfeeding and being nursed back to sleep if they wake up. This ‘comfort baseline’, as Narvaez calls it, is where you need to start.
Next, what is the smallest step you can take to move away from the baseline?
It may be to stop nursing while they are still drowsy but not yet asleep and cuddle them instead so they can still feel your body and your heartbeat. If your baby accepts this step, repeat it so it becomes the new comfort baseline before going on to the next step or nudge: a further separating step such as lying them down when they become drowsy and stroking their forehead, or whatever soothes your baby. The next step might be to move the baby out of the bed and into a cot right next to it. Then going on to move the cot further away, and eventually into another room. At any stage, if your baby becomes distressed, you return to their comfort baseline.
My story:
My first nudge was to stop nursing when my daughter was still drowsy and cuddle her.
When that became her baseline, the next nudge was to pass her over to her father to cuddle her to sleep. With that arrangement, we could have one adult sleeping with her while the other got some sleep in another room.
When she was about two, she asked for her own room but was aghast when it came to night-time and we suggested she should sleep in it alone. ‘Oh, not to sleep in, only to play in,’ she said. We gave her another nudge by saying we would stay with her until she was asleep and, if she woke up, she could come into our bed, so long as she didn’t wake us up and there was no talking. She accepted this arrangement and sometimes we woke up with our daughter in the bed with us and sometimes we didn’t.
By the time she was three she only ever slept in her own room, and when she was four she was happy and secure enough to start to put herself to bed, which she did of her own volition, with no nudging. Although this was on her terms: she got to choose whether she put herself to bed or asked one of us to be with her as she got ready. She didn’t resist going to bed because it had always been a place of comfort, not of loneliness.

The important thing is, you make each of these nudges within your child’s baseline of comfort. We all develop at different speeds and have different needs for closeness and for our own space, so when the time is right will depend on your baby. What felt fine with your first child might not be the case with the next. What you want is for your child to associate their bed with relief from tiredness, with comfort, cosiness and sleep rather than separation, loneliness and desperation. If bed is about good things, they will not be reluctant to go there.
This will help them get enough sleep throughout their childhood, which, as you know, is important for their development.
Doing the sleep-nudge process (rather than sleep training), using encouragement rather than punishment will take longer, but I believe it’s worth it. The result will be more long-lasting and makes separating to go to bed easier for children as they develop, and it contributes to a good relationship between you and your child. Being encouraged to do anything is fine for a relationship, but being tricked, ignored or manipulated into a behaviour is not going to enhance your lifelong bond. I do understand how difficult it is to take the long- term view when you are exhausted but, again, I believe it is worth it.
Many of the things we expect our children to achieve, they will, with the minimum guidance or from following our example. Nudging them to the edge of their comfort zone but not beyond it is often a way forward if they do need some help. Remember that, if we do something that they can do for themselves, we may be disempowering them.
