# Support: to parent we need to be parented in turn

It can feel hard to give time, respect and warm responsiveness to a child when you’re running on empty. It may be just because you are exhausted right now, or because it feels like those things weren’t given to you by your parents. To parent we need to have been parented in turn. That said, you will probably be amazed just how many reserves you’ll find and how long it is possible to keep going.
But this is not indefinitely sustainable so, if you do feel depleted, get support.
That support might be in terms of practical help to free you up to give more attention to your child – or to sleep. Or it might be having someone listen to you and feel with you while you are in the midst of giving what you feel you were not given or have not got to give. Being listened to, being heard, not being judged for whatever feelings parenting brings up for you do not necessarily need to be done by a trained therapist. Friends and family can be good for this too, if they can accept and relate to normal parental ambiguity. We need to remember it is not our feelings or the things we find ourselves imagining that can harm our children, it is how we act towards them. Think about Mark’s case study (see p.
19). The fact that he wanted to run away didn’t adversely affect his son because he didn’t run away.
This is Charlotte’s story:
I used to have really scary thoughts about hurting my baby, Rosanne. When she wouldn’t stop waking me up during the night with crying, I had thoughts of throwing her or shaking her. These thoughts upset me more than her crying did. I felt really ashamed of them and thought, if I told anyone, Rosanne would be taken away from me. Then I tortured myself with thinking perhaps she should be taken away. The only time I had anything like it before was when I wanted to kill my parents when I was a teenager.
Those thoughts were not as intrusive as the ones I had about my daughter, though. I really thought I might lose it and hurt her. When I couldn’t stand it any more I plucked up my courage and talked to my sister. She told me that everyone feels like that at times and what she does is just watch herself have the thoughts, just like listening to an annoying person you have no intention of being influenced by. Just having her accept me as normal and not think I was going mad really helped, and I think the thoughts of hurting my daughter started to lose their grip on me after this. And I know I can talk to my sister again if they were to come back. I wish I’d spoken about it earlier.

If, as a parent, we feel we can’t talk about less-than-ideal thoughts, feelings or imaginings, they can become bigger and harder to manage. It is important to be able to talk about them, to have a place to dispel feelings in a cathartic way, so we don’t act them out at the expense of our children.
The sort of support you need is someone who really hears you, who gets what you mean and can take on board all your feelings without being overwhelmed by them so that person acts as a sort of calm container for them. Their calmness comes from the knowledge that, whatever you’re going through in terms of anxiety or doom, it will pass. Their gentle optimism can carry you through. That is the sort of help that Mia, in the previous section, got from her mother and
Charlotte got from her sister.
You need this sort of support because, in turn, the baby needs you to be able to hold all their feelings without being overwhelmed by them. It’s your job to offer this kind of supportive relationship to your child. And it’s hard to give that sort of attention to anyone unless you’re getting some of it too. You may have to spell out to your nearest and dearest that this is the type of help you need.
You may also need practical help. Some people around you may be good at guessing that you do and offering help but, if they aren’t, do ask for it. Also, it is not just mothers who need emotional support but fathers too. Humans are not meant to stand alone, mute and strong; we are pack animals, members of a tribe.
Get the tribe to help. It is so much harder to finance a family now than it was for the generation before us because buying or renting a home costs many times as much as it did. I believe that, while we wait for the politicians to rectify this unfairness, perhaps the previous generation could help out new parents financially as well as emotionally.
We need help that enables us to form a better bond with our children, not help that allows us to push them away. Sheena’s story gives an example of how that can happen and how to get back on track if it does. Sheena, a part-time stylist, already had two children and was pregnant with twins.
When Sheena had a month to go of her pregnancy she was told that one of her twins wasn’t thriving and she’d need to be induced. The subsequent birth was traumatic and dangerous both for Sheena and for the babies. One twin, Charlie, was born fine; the other, Ted, required a lot of help and had to be incubated.
Sheena stayed in hospital with poorly Ted and Charlie went home. For four weeks, Sheena helped and held Ted until he was well enough to leave hospital.
Sheena’s partner, Judd, a very successful musician, worked long hours and was often away from home on tour, and either wouldn’t, or perhaps felt he couldn’t, take extra time off to become more involved in his family at this time. Possibly he also feared that he wouldn’t be able to control his emotions if he dwelt on the fact that he had nearly lost his wife and one of his children in childbirth. The often-asserted belief that men have to be ‘strong’ does, in my opinion, far more harm than good.
When she got home Sheena couldn’t quite take on board the fact that she was the mother of twins. She kept on the nursery nurse they’d hired to look after
Charlie. She knew Charlie was hers on a cognitive level but didn’t really feel as though he was – she saw him as the nanny’s and Ted as hers. Because this felt so uncomfortable, she wanted to forget it and believe that nothing was wrong.
Sheena distracted herself by showing everyone just how fine she was. She went out a lot, regularly clubbing until the small hours. Her feelings kept hitting her like shocks – the shock of having twins, the shock of a very difficult birth, the shock of nearly losing Ted and, worst of all, the feeling Charlie was not really hers. When she felt one of these shocks, rather than looking into it, she got more childcare and distracted herself by going out.
When Charlie cried she never really felt like comforting him. If the nanny wasn’t around, she’d ask one of the children, Judd, her mother, the cleaner –
‘Anyone but me,’ she said later. Her way of comforting him was to try to distract him rather than soothing him through any distress – not unlike how she was trying to distract herself from being overwhelmed by her own feelings.
It wasn’t until Charlie was about four years old that, emotionally, Sheena could accept him as her son. ‘I think I was in shock for over three years, but I only realized this when I started to come out of it,’ she says.
What affect has all this had on Charlie? Now, the twins are ten years old.
Sheena’s other children, including Ted, are happy-go-lucky, but Charlie is an anxious child and very clingy. He seems to feel he cannot take any relationship for granted and that, to be lovable, he must work hard. Sheena says Charlie would do anything for Ted, even though Ted does not return the compliment, or at least, hasn’t yet returned it. Sometimes friends and siblings experience
Charlie’s wanting to please as neediness and find it annoying. This compounds his problem and then he tries even harder to get it right for other people. This insecurity he has about relationships in all likelihood has something to do with the early separation from his mother and the lack of bonding after her return.
Sheena says the only time he is more relaxed is when she spends one-on-one time with him – no easy feat when you have a job and four children.
But once a week Sheena and Charlie go to an art class, just the two of them.
Sheena says it’s helping. When the art class doesn’t meet because of holidays she makes sure they have their two hours every week at exactly the same time, to do art together, just the two of them.
I asked Sheena what might have helped her to do things differently, early on.
She felt that, had the birth been less traumatic, she might not have been in so much shock, which she thinks is one reason she went into denial about being a mother of twins. But she thinks the main cause of the rupture was not being with
Charlie for those four weeks after the birth. When she got home, she says, ‘He didn’t smell like my baby, but Ted did.’ She also thinks if she’d had counselling at the time she would’ve been able to face up to what had happened and talk through the impact it had on her. Although Charlie was crying and wanted to be found by Sheena, she too needed to be understood and to be found. By not being able to feel for herself, she was impaired when it came to feeling for others, especially for Charlie. Not feeling for him made it easy for her to distract herself and run away from him, to leave him in the care of the nanny.
Sheena loves and adores her Charlie these days, relishing her one-to-one time with him. By spending as much time as she can with him, she is mending the early rupture. When we are bringing up our children we can only do our best, and, as I keep repeating, to have good relationships with our children it is not so much the ruptures that count but how they are repaired.
Now Sheena and Charlie’s bond is cementing, Charlie’s sense of security in his relationships is improving. As his sense of longing diminishes, his sense of joy will increase. Because the good news is that, although we are never again the sponges we were as babies, we are not made of stone. We form in relationship with others and we can re-form in relationship with others as well, for the rest of our lives. If Sheena hadn’t addressed this early rupture with Charlie, it’s possible that, when he got older, his romantic attachments might have taken on the same pattern of feeling insecure, and love to him would have felt more like the pain of longing rather than joyful union.
One day, Charlie may need more help to become more trusting in relationships and less anguished. He may need his parents to tell him the story of his early life so he can make sense of the way he feels. It will help him to know that the way he feels is not because of any fault of his, and certainly not because he is less lovable than anyone else, but because when we are babies we are so very impressionable.
Sheena’s partner, Judd, didn’t notice she hadn’t bonded with Charlie. And he didn’t attempt to bond with Charlie either. Had he taken on the role of a primary carer from Charlie’s birth, rather than completely relying on the nursery nurse to fulfil all Charlie’s needs, I believe Charlie would have felt more secure in his relationships. I am all for extra help, but children need a primary bond with their parents.
I’m not telling this story so we can tut-tut at Sheena and Judd. He was just doing what the men in his family, and many men in the past, have always done – leaving the early parenting to mothers and to paid help. It is hard to break these cultural patterns because they are so entrenched, unless we are sufficiently aware of them to challenge them.
Sheena probably learned her pattern of dealing with her difficult feelings by distraction rather than working through them because it was how her early caregivers had tried to cheer her up. Just as her husband believed that parenting is not a man’s role, it’s easy to believe a way of acting is ‘natural’, whereas it is merely indoctrinated. And these indoctrinations can get in the way of our relationships with our children. It’s not a matter of being a ‘bad’ parent or a
‘good’ parent – everyone does their best. But if we can make ourselves aware of as many of the effects and beliefs of our culture and our upbringing as we can, we can make repairs that lead to a more functional way of going forward.
Most parents need help with their children, from relatives or paid helpers, so they can work, or even just take a shower. However, the most important people in a child’s life should be their parents (and remember: by ‘parent’, I mean the person or people who have the primary responsibility for the child, so ‘parent’ may mean foster parent, adoptive parents, step-parent, guardian, surrogate parents, rather than people who temporarily help with this responsibility).
Everyone needs a primary bond as a safe anchor in their life. Paid helpers leave, and this can break the primary bond, which may have effects later on. And children need to feel they are a priority for their parents, especially in their early years. They need to feel like they’re people to relate to rather than tasks to be delegated.
Exercise: What support do you need?
Write your name or draw a symbol to represent you in the middle of a piece of paper.
Around you, write or draw your support network. Think about who will support you naturally and who you will have to ask. For example, your mother may show up and ask the right questions and listen and offer to pay your rent for a year; your sister may cook you meals with the minimum of fuss; your partner may help to keep you company, the home clean and the family financially afloat. Other help may need organizing, for example, starting or joining a group of other parents in a similar position to you or getting professional support if you need it. Draw your diagram using solid lines from support to you if it will just happen naturally and dotted lines if you will have to arrange it. Think about the types of support you might need – emotional and practical. Look for any gaps on your support diagram, then take steps to fill them.
And parents may need support not just after the birth of a baby but at any time while their children are dependent. So this exercise can be repeated every couple of years so that you can ensure you get the help you need to help you make the best possible relationships with your children.
