# Post-natal depression

Loneliness can be a factor in post-natal depression too, although depression after the birth or the acquisition of parental responsibility has many causes.
Symptoms of post-natal depression include: irritability, deep sadness and despair, feeling useless, anxiety, insomnia, every small thing feeling like it takes a huge effort, wanting to hide away from others, thoughts of self-harm and, in extreme cases, psychosis. Post-partum depression affects 10 to 15 per cent of new mothers each year. Several studies also suggest that as many as 10 per cent of fathers also suffer from this psychological disorder.
This is Paula’s experience of post-natal depression:
Ricky screamed when I didn’t pick him up and he screamed when I did. When I handed him to my partner, she seemed to know what to do more than me. I began to feel I didn’t know what I was doing. I was terrified I would somehow break Ricky doing a nappy change. I was so ashamed about how I felt I told anyone who asked, including my health visitor, that I was ‘fine’.
I was sure there must be something wrong with Ricky, though, to cry so much. I took him to the GP’s surgery, but they could find nothing wrong. I felt even worse because then I felt ashamed for taking him in.
I began to feel my baby would be better off without me. I couldn’t even breastfeed as my nipples hurt so much – it felt like pins going through me. Bottle-feeding made me feel like even more of a failure.
It all came to a head when Ricky was twelve weeks old. I completely broke down and my partner and my brother saw I wasn’t coping. They wouldn’t accept my reply of ‘fine’ any longer. I had to confess I wanted to die, or at least run away. I have never felt so awful, so bleak, so depressed. It felt much bigger than just becoming a mother. A dense cloud of misery had descended on me.
It was tough on my partner because she had to do most of the baby care. She was finding it hard to cope too, although she wasn’t in the dark place I was, and I don’t think she had time for my feelings as well as everything else. She made me go to therapy, which made me angry at the time because it felt like she was pushing me away. I thought she and the baby were the couple and I was being pushed out.
When I look back at this period it seems unreal as I was, in a matter-of-fact way, planning to kill myself. I believed everyone would be better off without me. I fully expected to follow it through – but thought I’d try therapy first.
The therapist asked me to think about my own babyhood. I couldn’t remember it so I asked my family. My cousin told me that when I was three months old my parents had handed me into the care of an aunt and a nanny and gone abroad for a month without me. I asked them why they’d done this. My father said they were getting a bit fed up with being in the world of baby and needed a break. My mum told me she was so upset when they came back because I didn’t recognize her. And she said it in a tone as though she was still cross with me.
I felt sad because I hadn’t been enough for her as a baby, and anger that she had left me. And I realized why Ricky felt like an alien to me – I had felt like an alien to my own mother. I realized why I felt my partner and Ricky were the couple and I was pushed out, because as a baby I really had been pushed out. I started to think, ‘No wonder I felt I couldn’t do it, my parents couldn’t do it either.’
Making this connection somehow helped. I began slowly, indiscernibly, to get better.
When Ricky was eight months old, I realized I was his mother and therefore I had to be there for him. I came to a sort of acceptance that I was for him and he was for me. I could connect more with him and feel for Ricky when he cried rather than take it as though it was a punishment directed at me.
After a year of going to therapy weekly I was not back to my normal self but I was more accepting of my new normal self. Gradually, I got to know this new version of myself – and even got to like her. And, by the way, my son is a kind and lovely twenty- two-year-old now.

It can help to find a narrative that makes sense of your feelings, like Paula did. Even knowing there is a narrative that would make sense of how you feel, even if you do not know what it is, can be sufficient.
The more we can speak about impulses and reactions we have in relation to our baby and have them understood and accepted, the more we are able to reflect and to perceive the baby as a baby and not as an object on to which we are unknowingly projecting a monster or a ghost from our past. And the more we can speak, the more we can feel that we are not a monster because we imagine we may harm the baby or fantasize about escaping from them or running away from our life. Remember: a fantasy is not harmful when it is just a fantasy.
Talking about fantasies and feelings can help to place them where they were first felt, that is, to think about them in the context of our own upbringing. This can help to minimize them.
I believe we all need someone non-judgemental to talk to, someone we can be fully and unapologetically ourselves with – that is how your baby needs to use you, after all. This person or people can be other parents who understand. Or, if you want to speak to a therapist or your doctor, do not hesitate because you’re thinking you don’t feel bad enough to warrant it or so bad they will be shocked and horrified. Having a baby is a big deal emotionally and physically. All the different hormones are exaggerating your emotions and, if your feelings cause you to withdraw from interacting with your baby or your family, it’s a good idea to seek support and professional help.
This is Gretchen’s experience of post-natal depression:
I was the first of my friendship group to have a baby. I missed my old life. I missed work and I missed seeing people. At work, I was a high achiever with high standards. As a mother, I felt as if I was wrong all the time. I did all the right things, like going to mother- and-baby groups, but when I was there I’d compare myself with the other mothers and find myself lacking.
When my baby cried it grated on me rather than making me want to soothe him.
Leaving the house was so stressful I thought I’d end up forgetting the baby in a shop, so most of the time I didn’t bother. I avoided answering the door. Even getting dressed was too much some days. I wasn’t sleeping much. I’d needed forceps at the delivery and I’d found the whole procedure very invasive. When I did get to sleep I’d keep waking up, reliving the whole nightmarish experience of the birth.
Just before my boyfriend got home I’d get dressed. I’d tell him everything was wonderful. I thought if I told him or anyone just how useless I felt they would judge me.
He did notice I was nervous and shaky and kept asking me what was wrong. I said it was just lack of sleep and I was okay. I really wasn’t okay.
I dragged myself to another local mother-and-baby group, ready to pretend I was fine again, just so I’d have something to tell my boyfriend when he got home. One woman there, Suzi, announced that she was not coping, described how awful she felt. The others started to give her advice, which I could see just made her feel worse. I took my courage in both hands and said, ‘Me too,’ and I told her my experience. We became friends. Suzi found out about a group for women with depression – together, we thought this is what we had. The group had a crèche. All we mums did was crafts – like kids, sticking bits of cloth on to paper to make collages – but it was the best thing for both of us. As we stuck and sewed things, everyone just talked. Told it like it was. I think realizing I wasn’t a freak and other people were going through the same thing was what made the depression begin to shift.
Three years later, I have a great relationship with my son. Our sticky start doesn’t seem to have done much damage. I now have a second child, a daughter who was born a year ago. The differences this time are that now I’m not isolated and I don’t believe that, unless everything is perfect, I’m a failure. It’s not that I think these are the reasons for my depression after my son was born, it just felt hormonal to me.

Remember: your experience and your feelings after a baby comes into your life are not right and they are not wrong. However weird and unusual they seem to you, do not keep them to yourself. Find like-minded people to talk to like
Gretchen did, and don’t hesitate to seek professional help. Don’t think you are not in a bad enough state, or in too bad a state, to do this. You not only owe it to yourself to feel present and correct, you owe it to your child.
Exercise: The hidden parts of parenting
The following exercise is what is called a guided visualization. You will be asked to visualize a scenario in your mind’s eye and the idea is to really explore it to try to find out what’s going on in your hidden depths.
Imagine three rooms. The first one is a reception room, then two doors lead off the reception room into the second room and the third room. Think of this three-roomed house as a metaphor for you as a parent. In your mind’s eye, go to the reception room.
This is where you receive visitors. Here, you have your public face on.
The second room is where you feel most unsure, and perhaps most angry, regretful, ashamed, frustrated, sad or dissatisfied. This is the room of difficulty and vulnerability when it comes to being a parent. Walk into that room and dare to feel what it feels like in here. Have a look round and note what you see without judging yourself. As you spend time in this room and feel what it is like to be in here, notice your breathing. If you were holding your breath or breathing shallowly, breathe normally again. Take one last look round the room of difficulty and then come back into the reception room again, back into the public space. Notice what it feels like to shut the door on the room of difficulty but know that the difficulty is still there.
Now it’s time to open the door to the third room. This is the room where you feel most positive. In this room everything is going right, you feel a sense of pride in who you are as a parent and you feel the joy you can feel with your child or children, and possibly more pride than you could show in the reception room. Have a look round the positive room and see what it is that is there. Keep looking and notice what you feel in this room.
Good.
Now come back into the reception room. As you stand in the reception room, have a good sense of what is behind both closed doors. Remember: we all have these rooms as well as the public face of parenting when other people can see us with our children. And we all have how we feel about ourselves as parents, things we feel great about and things we feel less than great about. What is so important is not to compare our own private room of difficult feelings to other people’s public face of parenting.
Remember: we all need someone accepting to talk to about those two rooms off the reception room. Someone who can hear us when we feel flooded with love and someone who can accept us and the more ambiguous feelings that parenting brings up.
