# When parents aren't together

Even if you live apart from your child’s other parent, what matters is that you refer to them in respectful ways, that you can appreciate their good points and not always be emphasizing their faults. I know this may seem impossible to some people, especially after a difficult break-up. It may make it easier for you when I tell you how important it is for a child: they see themselves as belonging, attached to and part of each of you. If one half of the partnership that brought them into being is often referred to as somehow being a ‘bad’ person, that is all too often internalized by the child so that they too see themselves as a ‘bad’ person. A child can also be torn apart by the pull to be loyal to both their parents.
So what’s the best way to negotiate a split? A child fares better afterwards if the parents cooperate with each other and communicate well and if the child continues to have regular close contact with both parents. If you can manage that, your child is less likely to become depressed or aggressive. As for the child’s relationship with their non-resident parent, this also works better if there is clear, positive communication between the parents. If one parent (it is often the father, but not always) drifts away after separation, the child is more likely to suffer distress, anger, depression or low self-esteem. That’s why it’s such a worry that, in the UK, more than a quarter of children whose parents have split up have no further contact with their father three years after the event.
I understand it is not always possible to get along with an ex, as this story I’m about to share shows. Mel is mum to a six-year-old son, Noah. She had a relationship with Noah’s father, James, for five years. They often lived in different countries and didn’t see themselves as a committed couple, but they enjoyed each other’s company hugely when they did get together. Mel’s story may sound extreme, but anyone who’s had parenting disagreements with an ex may find it useful.
When Mel got pregnant, James assumed she would have an abortion. When she didn’t, he was furious and tried to sever their connection. Now, he pays minimal maintenance, and only agreed to do so after the humiliating procedure of a paternity test. He wants nothing to do with Noah.
When I have spoken to people in a similar position to James’s, they’ve told me that they like their life as it is. They feel threatened and scared by the possibility of it changing if they were to acknowledge the importance of a dependant.
And yet a child – who is not an ‘it’ but a person in your life, albeit one who is dependent on you for a couple of decades – is more than a mere catalyst for change. If you were to look at becoming a parent selfishly, a child is in fact a source of enrichment.
Also, a child does not cease to exist just because they are being ignored.
Sadly, some men (and women) do distance themselves from their children. It’s as though, if they pretend they have nothing to do with them, they do not really exist. Mel instinctively knew that she must not tell Noah his father had let her down, even though she felt he had. If her son asks about him, she remembers his dad’s many good qualities and talents and tells her son about them. If, in the future, Noah’s father should ever want to re-enter his life, Mel being positive about him will help this process. As Noah gets older and asks more questions, it’s becoming harder for her. She is worried that her son, when he does know the whole story, will take his father’s desertion personally and that it might harm his self-esteem, or maybe distort how he regards his gender, or even negatively influence his own behaviour when he is an adult.
Because Mel is aware of these pitfalls, she can guide Noah around them but, even so, there can be no guarantee he won’t at some stage take the fact that his father isn’t there for him to heart. Sometimes there isn’t a prescription to make everything okay. Mel has a lot of loving and involved family and friends and feels they do go some way to filling in the gap for Noah where a father would have been.
I have told you Mel’s story because it’s not always easy to conjure up a smooth-running, cooperative relationship with an ex. And when one is lacking, all we can do is try our best not to run down the other parent to our child, or indeed to ourselves.
