# The importance of engaged observation

Quite often, when we think we are listening, all we are doing is waiting for a gap for an opportunity to speak back; we use our energy to compose our response or our reply rather than to try to understand what the other person is trying to communicate. Stopping doing this, and allowing instead the other person to impact upon us, can feel scary. It doesn’t feel scary if we put this fear into words, but it does when we have an unspoken fear that, if we really listen and allow ourselves to be impacted, we ourselves will disappear. We will not disappear – quite the opposite, we will grow. This is Jodie and Jo’s story.
In our first few weeks together I often felt drained by the neediness of my baby, Jo. I wanted to be open to her, to respond to her cries, but it was a struggle. It felt as if giving in to her demands would mean losing myself, that I’d be taken over by her.
What helped me become more open towards Jo, rather than trying to defend myself against her demands, was watching her. When I was with her, giving her my attention, she’d call on me less. I slowly got the knack of pre-empting some of her crying by learning to read her cues before she got distressed.
I began to talk to Jo with a running commentary as I did any housework or tasks, leaving spaces for her to ‘chat’ back at me. When I didn’t need to do anything, instead of playing with my phone or picking up a book, I would pay her attention.
I realized that, instead of always trying to show her stuff, if I looked at what she was looking at too, let her show me what she liked, it was more rewarding. She would look at things and I’d bring them closer to her or take her to them and look at them with her. She taught me to stop and to look, because I’d forgotten how to do that. It’s not that I got a thrill from examining a leaf or a ladybird, or watching SpongeBob Square-Pants, but watching her concentrate on things filled me with something; perhaps you’d call it awe, or even just love.
As Jo got older and started to talk I noticed my relationship with her was always better when I listened. Sometimes, I’d forget and talk at her or over her. And then she’d be less responsive – and I’d realize I’d fallen back into an old way of communicating, one that didn’t work for either of us.
Leaving space for Jo has mellowed me, made me feel more loving, not only to her but to other people and things. Jo is nearly grown up now and I think I’m more of a grown- up than I was because I expanded my own view so much from watching her, listening to her, seeing things from her perspective. Talking now about how she affects me fills me with love. Love that maybe I was incapable of before I was a parent. I feel expanded by her.

Jodie’s experience is about her relationship with her baby, about a new pattern of being with and responding she learned in relationship to her child. By really listening, rather than just thinking about her response or only about what she wanted to impart, she formed a deep loving and liking relationship with Jo. We can all do this, with our babies, children, adult children and, indeed, with anyone.
