# Loneliness

The baby might not be the only one plagued with loneliness. Although you’ve had nine months to get used to the idea, becoming a parent happens overnight.
And as your old life fades into the background and your new one has yet to get itself established, becoming lonely is a real danger. Unless you are in the centre of a large family or other group who are geographically and emotionally close to you, it is usual to feel lonely as a new parent.
Juli is a thirty-two-year-old mother of one. Johann, the baby’s father, left her when the baby was two months old. Juli told me, ‘I didn’t sign up to do this alone, but as soon as Sophie came along he left.’ She was shocked, panicky – and lonely. Loneliness is a feeling that afflicts many parents, even if they haven’t just been left by their partner. What made Juli feel even more lonely was that her parents seemed not to be able to see, or to admit, how near to her wits’ end she was.
Loneliness used to be associated with poor social skills or being a bit odd, so there’s still stigma and shame attached to it. But there shouldn’t be: loneliness affects everyone. It’s felt so strongly because it’s alerting you to what you need to do – find company. Humans are not isolates; we are pack animals. We feel hungry when we need to eat, we feel physical pain when we need to get out of the fire, and we feel lonely when we need to be with other people and feel seen and accepted by them. Loneliness is a necessary feeling, just like thirst and hunger. Ignore it at your peril, as it can be a major cause of deterioration of mental and physical health.
When we’re lonely we can feel how bad it is for us, so why don’t we just join a group or make more friends? Sadly, it’s often not that easy. Juli was exhausted and having to do something about her loneliness felt like another job she had no energy for. But there’s another reason why tackling loneliness feels so hard.
Feelings of loneliness trigger a state of hyper-vigilance for social threat and rejection, make us super-sensitive to possible rejection or coolness. And when we expect social threat, we can behave in ways that are more likely to get us rejected. Even though we may feel on the edge, we fear putting ourselves back into the centre again in case we are rebuffed – and therefore we pull ourselves even further away from people. This is how expecting to be rejected can become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Juli’s confidence took a nosedive after her partner left and she began to think of herself as ‘useless’. The thought of joining a parents’ support group or going to the mother-and-baby singing sessions she saw advertised locally made her just want to curl up indoors and never come out. It’s not only humans that feel like this; separate any social creature from their group and they will feel wary of rejoining that group or wary of joining a new group, in case they are pushed away and find themselves even more isolated. Research has shown that rats, and even fruit flies, after they’ve been separated from their group, don’t throw themselves back into the middle of it but stay on the edges. We have an advantage over rats and fruit flies: we can use reasoning to override our instincts to get what we need. Yet it feels hard and we come up with all sorts of excuses not to do it. It is normal to feel that you won’t fit into a new group and to make up reasons for that, the most common of which are thinking that you are somehow inferior (‘They’ll all know what they’re doing and I don’t’) or superior (‘I don’t want to join a group of parents who will only want to talk about weaning and nappies’). It may seem surprising that Juli, who a few months before had been a competent HR professional, couldn’t face joining a group, but it isn’t. People in isolation are more likely to scorn the idea of social interaction by thinking they are somehow better, or somehow worse, than other people, and thus give themselves an excuse not to try. Both these thought patterns – ‘I’m too good’ and ‘I’m not good enough’ – lead to a spiral of withdrawal and intensify the sense of social isolation.
It felt like a big step for Juli to admit the loneliness and talk herself into joining a group to combat it.
I’ve joined a breastfeeding-support group that I found through Facebook and it’s made a world of difference. We meet up a couple of afternoons a week in each other’s houses.
It’s good to have other mums listen to my experience, and I feel useful when I can offer support to them too. The group is online as well, which is invaluable in the middle of the night – so many of us are awake anyway! I can see I got into a habit of telling myself I was useless. Sharing with other parents about this and other woes has not made them go away but it has made them more manageable.

Exercise for coping with loneliness 1. Be prepared to recognize when you are lonely. Don’t deny it or judge yourself negatively for feeling it.
2. Understand what loneliness does to you: remember, as a member of a social species, it’s dangerous to feel isolated.
3. Learn to recognize that hyper-vigilant state so you can over-ride it – don’t be a fruit fly. Quite often, new parents don’t want to join groups because they’ll feel too clever for them or too inadequate, so watch out for such feelings of superiority or inferiority. They’re just excuses to cling to the distrust that loneliness can produce.
4. Reach out and be reachable. See what parent and baby groups are available near you, see if you can connect with other local parents online, ask friends over to visit and visit friends.
