# Whingeing

The behaviours that seem to particularly irk parents are: whining, whingeing, clinging and sobbing. That isn’t the crying when kids fall over but the plaintive grizzling they do when parents can’t think of a reason why their offspring might be sad or is still sad after the parent has made heroic efforts to distract them or cheer them up.
You may just want to get your child to stop when they do this; you may see it as ‘bad’ behaviour. But I wonder whether the irritation you feel at the whingeing is something to do with being shut off from what it felt like when you were an infant or a child and you felt sad and defenceless? The annoyance with your child could be coming from you not wanting to be taken back to the pain of re- experiencing old feelings of fragile vulnerability. So instead you try to shut down your child.
In addition, or alternatively, you may experience your child’s whining or crying as a criticism of your parenting skills. Maybe you have an unspoken expectation that children should be happy all the time. Therefore, what to the child is just sadness or loneliness is felt by you as a reminder of your impotence over what your child is going through at that moment.
Bella is a forty-five-year-old senior manager in a large corporation. She is married to
Steve, a chef and restaurateur, and they have three boys aged eight, twelve and fourteen.
They are a lively family with plenty of weekend activities and socializing. The atmosphere at home is one of cheerful busyness. Bella and Steve both have demanding jobs and Juanita lives with them during the week as a childminder/housekeeper. She has been with the family since their oldest boy was five.
Bella thinks her youngest son, Felix, has a problem. ‘Felix is really clingy,’ she told me. ‘Even though he’s eight, he needs more attention, day and night, than my two other boys put together did when they were his age. I have wondered if I didn’t bond properly with him as a baby, but I think I did. I really don’t know why Felix seems so insecure.’
I was interested in why Bella had a low tolerance of Felix’s clinging behaviour and what was perhaps stuck in their relationship. I told Bella to ask Felix about his dreams. I didn’t expect to get any answers from his dreams, but I thought of it as a way of Felix talking and Bella listening.
Bella told me: ‘Felix said he had a terrible dream where he was all alone and couldn’t find anyone. I asked him if he’d ever experienced that in real life, confident he hadn’t. I was surprised when he said he had. “I remember when we were visiting your brother in
Wales, you left me alone in the car.”
‘As he said this, I remembered it too. My brother lives in the middle of nowhere and, once, when Felix was nearly two, he was asleep when we arrived so I got the other boys inside and unpacked the car and put the shopping away, then went back out to check on him. He’d woken up and was crying.
‘I was devastated he’d remembered this. I said sorry, and “You couldn’t have been alone in the car for more than five minutes, darling,” and we had a hug. I began to wonder how one tiny incident from six years ago could still be around for him now.’
The incident may have been tiny for Bella, but it probably wasn’t for Felix. I asked
Bella if Felix had ever been left alone in a strange place, before or since. She said, ‘No, but when he was little, twenty months, he had such a severe septic throat that he had to be hospitalized. The antibiotics didn’t work and, for a week, he was put in a coma and on a machine to help him breathe. While in the coma, he was sometimes alone, but after he was taken out of it Steve or I were always with him.’
‘Bella,’ I said, ‘how awful for you that your son was so sick he had to be put into a coma.’ She replied, ‘Oh, it was fine – I mean, not very nice, but you get through these things.’
When Bella said this I felt pushed away, that my concern was unwanted. And in that moment it felt to me as though she had been – and was still – pushing away her own feelings about Felix’s illness. I felt shocked and moved myself, imagining what it must have been like for the little boy to be so ill and what it must have been like to be his parents. Bella said, ‘Steve said we might have lost him, but I couldn’t go there.’ I felt another wave of sadness and told her so. As I looked at her I noticed that she too had tears in her eyes.
I said, ‘This could be why Felix is clingy – because he had to cling on to life.
Although he couldn’t have known consciously you weren’t there when he was in a coma, it’s possible he knew it on another level, which perhaps explains his dream of being alone.’
Whether this was true or not, it resonated with Bella, helped make sense of Felix’s behaviour for her. And this in turn made it easier for her to empathize with Felix.
Another thing that may have happened is that Bella finally allowed herself to feel the fear and sadness about losing Felix that she’d repressed for so long. It’s completely normal to want to lock away our difficult feelings, but when we do we risk becoming insensitive to the difficult feelings of others, including our children. All the time Bella was repressing her feelings about Felix’s illness, Felix’s feelings irritated her.
When Bella did finally allow herself to experience what nearly losing Felix had felt like, it didn’t completely consume her, as she’d feared. ‘Before, I always thought it was
Felix’s fault he was clingy. I’d think, your brothers are fine, so why aren’t you? I realize now that you can’t blame anyone for their feelings.’
After we talked it was Bella who had a dream – in fact, a nightmare. She dreamed two of her nieces and Felix went swimming in the sea and got into difficulties. The girls were saved but Felix drowned. Bella woke up with a start, tearful and upset, and went to check on Felix, who was asleep, safe and sound. The irony of this action struck her – it was usually Felix coming into his parents’ bedroom.
These days, if Bella does feel irritated with Felix, she takes responsibility for this. She’s not sure this is down to Felix being less clingy, whether she has softened towards his clinginess, whether she’s reaching out more towards him, or all three.

There are as many reasons for clinginess and whingeing as there are children and relationships with each of their caregivers. The reason why I put in the above case study was not because a child having nearly died is a common reason for clinginess. It’s because not wanting to be sensitive to the feelings our children trigger in us causes us to get stuck in our relationships with our children, prevents us being as close as we might want to be and so reduces our children’s capacity for happiness.
Acknowledging and validating feelings – our own and our children’s – is important, not only for our own and their mental health but as a way of understanding our triggers, our children’s triggers and for gaining a deeper knowledge of why we all behave how we do.
All feelings – clinginess, ghosts in the wardrobe, monsters under the bed, just feeling sad or overwhelming frustration – make sense once we find their context. If the context isn’t obvious, it doesn’t mean there isn’t one. The first step is to accept the child’s feeling, which will help you understand their behaviour. Once this happens, you will be able to tolerate it and so be in a better position to collaborate with your child to come up with solutions to make helpful changes.
