# The give and take, to and fro of communication

Initially, when your baby makes a noise, they are communicating with you. A baby’s noises, their gestures, their coercive cries and the way they initiate turn- taking games are the forerunner to conversation. With all of these, your child is looking for your reciprocity.

If you tell them to ‘shush’, you are telling them that their communication is not welcome. Over time and many ‘shushes’, this may make them feel that they are not welcome. I am no fan of the ‘shush’. I see nothing wrong with a pacifier when used in conjunction with attention and loving touch to help soothe a child, but I don’t like it being used as a stopper, to gag the essential to and fro of communication.

Before our children learn to articulate their feelings we learn their cues by observing them. They may be minutes or years old, but they will have their unique viewpoint of the world. I believe the happiest parents are those who are open and willing to learn from their children, to keep expanding their viewpoint by taking in their children’s. A child whose person and point of view is respected learns innately to respect others. They can take it for granted that there is more than one way of seeing things and experiencing things.

If you are parents to a baby and you just want to gaze at your baby and have
‘conversations’ with them made up of gestures and facial expressions, this is exactly what you need to do. This ‘game’ is what develops into the give and take of dialogue. And it helps to strengthen your bond, as it develops your relationship. Later on, we lose sight of our body-to-body communications with our children as words gradually take over, but it will still be there. It is still relevant to observe a child as well as hear them in order to fully listen to them and to allow them to impact on you. And indeed, this is relevant to adult relationships as well.

In a dialogue, whether it’s just looks and gestures or includes sounds or speech, both parties affect each other. When I say ‘gestures’, I am talking about all body movements, some deliberate and some more like body-to-body communication as we pick up on each other’s moods and intentions. It’s not one partner being all teacher and giver and the other all recipient and sponge. It’s not just one body affecting the other body but both bodies affecting each other. This is how a fulfilling relationship develops. Mutual impact is key to all our relationships – and that’s true for a child-and-parent pairing too. Too often it is easy to be in too much of a rush, and then a relationship, instead of being in a steady rhythm of to and fro and turn-taking, becomes instead about being what I call ‘Doing and Done to’, where one party is dominant and the other submissive rather than each being an equal partner in the communication exchange. This happens when we do not leave a gap for the other to respond and, if this becomes a habit, the relationship can lose its way.

Think of it like a teacher with a class. The teachers who engage their pupils are the ones who read a class and tailor their teaching to that class. They are not afraid to learn from the pupils in turn. They find out what the pupils know already, they keep them interested by getting them to brainstorm, they check they’ve been understood before putting the next piece of information in place. A classroom working like this is a peaceful place of to and fro, whereas when a teacher just gives out information to the pupils, they are likely to become resentful or restless and don’t learn as much.

Where we feel most frustrated and find relationships to be the most unsatisfactory is when we do not have an impact. It doesn’t matter what we say and do, the person or organization does not heed us, even if they are doing things to us, and we can begin to feel hopeless, isolated or rebellious. So it is important to allow yourself to be impacted by your children – let them influence you. You will be modelling how to be influenced, which is important so that your children in turn allow themselves to be influenced by you.
