# Distracting away from feelings

Distraction is a tactic favoured by parents to divert children from having whatever experience they may be having. It’s commonly used, but it’s rarely appropriate. That’s because distraction is a trick and, in the long term, being manipulated will not help your child develop a capacity for happiness.
Look into a baby’s eyes and you’ll see nothing but sincerity. I believe our children, whatever their age, deserve nothing less from us. Distraction is not sincere on the part of the parent and it is manipulative. It can also be an insult to a child’s intelligence.
What message does distraction convey? Imagine you fall over and badly graze your knee. How would you feel if your partner, instead of being concerned or interested in the pain or the blood or the embarrassment, pointed out a squirrel or promised that you could play your favourite video game?
I’m not saying there is no place for distraction, but not as a manipulative tactic. If, for example, your child needs to have a medical procedure, it may be a good idea to tell them they will feel it less if, instead of concentrating on the injection, they concentrate on the sensation of your fingers stroking their forehead. In this example, you are not trying to trick them – they know what is going to happen – you’re offering distraction as a comfort.
Your children are liable to treat you in whatever manner you treat them. You would not like it if you asked to discuss their school report with them and they pointed out of the window and said, ‘Look! Squirrel!’
It is also a good idea to tell your child’s nursery teachers and childminders that you would prefer it if your child’s feelings were empathized with rather than something they were distracted from. Distracting a child away from a toy another child is holding to ward off a conflict will not help them to understand, and nor will it help them learn how to negotiate a struggle. Avoiding difficult feelings is not how we learn how to deal with them.
Besides, if your child wants something you do not want them to have, like your car key, say, they need to learn they cannot have it rather than just being temporarily distracted away from it. They need to hear that you don’t like them playing with your key rather than hearing you say something like ‘Ooooh, look at this dolly.’ You can help them with their frustration rather than distracting them from it by saying, ‘You are angry that I can’t let you have the key. I can hear you are furious about it.’ If you stay calm and contain your child’s feelings, this is how they will learn to contain them. It might feel like a longer process than simply distracting them away from the key, but the time invested will help them internalize these skills for themselves.
If you repeatedly distract your child from what they feel or from their experience, you are also unwittingly discouraging them from being able to concentrate. Think of it like this: if your child has hurt themselves, or had their feelings hurt or their wishes denied, if you distract them from what they feel rather than help them work through it, it will discourage them from holding their attention on difficult things. And you do not want your child to be easily distracted from doing a difficult task.
But I believe the worst thing of all about unwanted distraction is that it’s a bar to a good, open and close relationship with your child.
One of the reasons you might be tempted to make light of what a child is going through by distracting them from it or denying their feelings is because you see the situation through your eyes, not theirs.
For example, if you as an adult cannot go to work with your mother, it’s not the end of the world. But for a toddler, it may feel as though it is. We may also be feeling guilty about being the cause of their distress so it may feel more comfortable to deny it.
So, what do you do if one partner goes out to work and your toddler seems inconsolable about it? If you are the parent who’s leaving, leave with confidence. Your child will be more likely to feel secure if you are calm, firm and optimistic. It is important not to sneak out but to take your leave with concern and kindness. If you panic about going, you may become overdramatic, and this won’t help your child. If you ignore their hurt, you are not being the mirror for them you need to be. Acknowledge what they feel; give them a hug and say something in a kind way like, ‘You don’t want me to go to work, and I will be back at teatime.’
If you are the parent or carer left with the child, what you need to do is be with the child where they are emotionally. This means acknowledging what has happened, which may be: ‘You didn’t want Mum to go out. You feel sad.’ If you think about it, it is entirely appropriate that you should be sad when someone you love leaves. You can say when she will be back. ‘Mum will be back by teatime.’ Do not lie about how long someone will be gone. The child will either learn a distorted idea of time or just not believe you on the next occasion.
Be there for the child, be attentive and be mindful about your own discomfort.
Be concerned, but do not overreact. Stay calm and do not leave the child alone to cry. Do not distract the child or ‘shush’ them or tell them they aren’t feeling what they are. Keep on listening, offer a hug if it is wanted. After a while the child may find an activity or you may suggest one, but not while they are deep in their distress. Remember how it might feel if you were missing someone you love so much you feel you cannot survive without them and another person comes along and pushes your deep, heartfelt feelings aside rather than respecting them. Once you have expressed yourself, when you are becoming resigned to the situation you will become more open to a suggested activity.
That’s very different to someone ordering you to look at Action Man doing a funny dance while you are in the middle of your distress.
Exercise: Think about distraction
Think about occasions when you have felt upset. How much time did you need to put your feelings into words, to try to make sense of them and get used to them, before you were ready to distract yourself by watching a film or reading a book? Just because the things we and our children get upset about are different, it does not mean their feelings are any less intense or real than ours.

A baby can’t help but be their feelings. In time, a child can learn to observe their feelings as a way of containing them – but they cannot learn to do this alone.
They need someone to accept and hold all their feelings as they grow up.
In our great need of wanting our children to be happy, sometimes we push them away when they are angry or sad. But for good mental health, children need to have their feelings accepted and to learn acceptable ways of expressing all their feelings – and the same is true for us adults. So, it is important to accept our own feelings rather than denying them, and essential to accept our children with whatever they may be feeling too. By helping a child put their feelings into words (or pictures) we help them to process them as well as to find acceptable ways for them to communicate what they feel.
