# The bond

## Part Five: Conditions for Good Mental Health

It’s fantastic that our society is finally talking about children’s mental health and what we can do to bolster it. But it’s sad that children’s mental health is at crisis point. In this section I will refer to the early weeks and months and the early years a lot, as they are so important when it comes to instilling a sense of security in our children, but, as I keep emphasizing, it is never too late to take steps to attempt to repair any rupture that may have happened during the early years if your child is older.
There are no guarantees that a deprived, terrible childhood will result in mental-health problems later, or that an ideal childhood will protect someone from losing their mind. Having said that, there are things we can do that will give your children the best possible chance to minimize any potential mental- health problems. We owe it to them and to ourselves to take a course that has the greatest likelihood of resulting in a healthy mind and body.

One of the most important indicators for good mental health is a strong bond between parent and child.
Humans are pack animals; we have lived in tribes for millennia. We are wired to bond to each other; it is how we survive as a species. The most primary bond of all is that of child and parent, parent and child. You will have a bond with your child and your child is hard-wired to form one with you. But how can you make that bond as rewarding as possible for both of you, and one that is most likely to create a capacity for health and happiness? I’ve talked about how important it is to keep a baby company, to be alongside them as they experience their feelings and moods so they don’t feel alone. I’ve also talked about how important it is for a baby to be physically close to their parents. But how, in addition to being physically close, do we get emotionally close to a baby or a young child? After all, it’s not as though you can both use words. What creates your bond and your relationship is give and take. By that, I am talking about the mutual influence we have on each other. It might seem obvious that I affect you, you affect me and we form a unique relationship together, different from other relationships we have with other people. And this is what will probably unconsciously happen, or has already happened, between you and your baby. I am starting with infants because that’s when the parenting relationship begins, but what I have to say about to-and-fro communication, about the desirability of dialogue being like a collaborative dance, is relevant to any relationship.
