# Role models

## Part Six: Behaviour: All Behaviour is Communication

I’ve put the section on behaviour last because it’s so much easier to behave better when the other things I’ve been talking about are taken care of. That includes, for a child, having their feelings considered as part of their supportive, loving relationships. We all behave better when we’re not desperate for more contact and connection, when we feel we belong.
The hand that rocks the cradle does rule the world. We owe it to the world to love more than we judge and to consider our children’s feelings rather than automatically dismissing them as silly or wrong. Treating infants and children with consideration and respect doesn’t mean you don’t set boundaries.
In this part, we will look at the winning and losing game, the qualities we need to develop to behave well, how strict a parent should be, clinging and whingeing and when to set boundaries and how to set them.

Your child will ape your behaviour, if not now, eventually. I once had a client who explained to me how very different he was from his father, who ran large corporations for profit in the top-down manner of an autocrat. But although my client worked in the charity sector, his way of running his department was – you’ve guessed it – autocratic. Our own behaviour is probably the biggest influence on our child’s behaviour. We think we are individuals, but we all affect each other. We are but parts of a system, and the roles we carve out for ourselves will be in reaction to the parts other people play around us. So, however your child behaves or how you behave, it is not in isolation, it is co-created by the people and culture around you too.
How would you describe your behaviour? Are you respectful to other human beings all the time? Do you consider their feelings? Does your ‘good behaviour’ go deep or is it merely manners? Are you pleasant on the surface, but do you then condemn people behind their backs? Do you get stuck in relentless games of one-upmanship? However you behave, you’ll be teaching your children to behave like that too, including any behaviour you don’t approve of.
If you consistently behave with kind consideration towards your children and towards other people, then your children will probably follow suit … eventually.
In the meantime, your children might not behave ‘well’ all the time, because before language, behaviour is the only way they can communicate what is going on for them. And this remains true even for quite a few years after they develop language too. That’s because it takes some practice and skill to know what it is we’re feeling, to put it into words and then to work out from that what we need.
Even adults – nay, even poets – can find this hard.
I don’t believe there is anyone who is all good or all bad. I’ll go even further:
I would say that the concepts of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are not useful. It is true, although quite rare, that some people are born without the capacity to feel empathy, no matter how much is shown to them. But having a differently wired brain does not mean you are in any way ‘bad’. I will only relent on this good- and-evil argument so far as to say that some people’s behaviour is inconvenient or harmful to others. No one is born bad. So rather than label behaviour as
‘good’ or ‘bad’, I describe it as ‘convenient’ or ‘inconvenient’.
Behaviour, as I’ve said, is purely communication. People – and especially children – act out in inappropriate, inconvenient ways because they haven’t found alternative, more effective, more convenient ways of expressing their feelings and needs. Some children’s behaviour is inconvenient to others, but it is not ‘bad’.
Your job is to decipher your child’s behaviour. Rather than dividing our children up into ‘good’ bits and ‘bad’ bits, there are questions you need to ask.
What is their behaviour trying to say? Can you help them to communicate in a more convenient way? What are they telling you with their bodies, with their noises and with whatever words they may choose? And, a really hard question to ask yourself: how is their behaviour co-created with yours?
