# Boundaries: define yourself and not the child

What children – and all of us – need is love plus boundaries, not one or the other.
Boundaries are important for any relationship. A boundary is the metaphorical line you draw in the sand that you won’t allow the other to cross. Just beyond that line is your limit and, if your limit is crossed, that’s when you lose your cool and cannot handle your frustration any longer.
That’s why it’s a good idea to put a boundary down before you reach your limit. One example of a boundary is saying something like, ‘I cannot allow you to play with my keys,’ and taking the keys away. A boundary is stated calmly but firmly. When you reach your limit, you have no such control and maybe you’ll react in a way that frightens your child, maybe by grabbing back your keys and yelling at them.
Sometimes parents find it hard to set boundaries. For example, when a much- longed-for child arrives after many miscarriages, IVF, or even, in some tragic circumstances, after a death of another child. Parents can be so blinded by love by such a happy miracle that they do not know where their own limits are and revere their progeny like a god. Without boundaries, your child will not learn where your and other people’s limits are, and if you grow up believing you are omnificent, you might go beyond good self-esteem into self-delusion. We all need boundaries so that we have some sort of structure to our lives that supports us and so we can learn to live together, and children are no exception. Get into the habit of putting down a boundary by describing yourself and not them, so it’s
‘I cannot allow you to have my keys’ rather than ‘I’ve told you before, you are not to be trusted with keys.’ Even if your baby cannot understand words yet, defining yourself in this way is a good habit to get into. When you are later setting a boundary with a teenager, they’ll be able to hear ‘I need you back at ten for my sake’ more easily than ‘You are too young to be out after ten.’
This is from an email from a friend who I had just shared my define-yourself- not-the-child theory with.
The other night, instead of saying my usual ‘Go and brush your teeth. Go and brush! I’ve told you four times, I’m not going to tell you again, I’m going to take away some of your screen time if you don’t do it now, and so on. I said ‘I’m really tired tonight and I’m getting really, really tired of listening to my voice nagging on about your teeth. Can you please go and do them?’ And he did. Love him.

You want your boundaries to be effective, so don’t dish out empty threats.
Before a child realizes that the threat is empty, it is too scary and therefore liable to shatter a child’s thought processes rather than help them learn consideration.
And, once they learn that your threats can be empty, they will not be able to take you seriously. So, mean what you say, do not relent and give them the keys back (or whatever it is). It may mean a tantrum, but you can be sympathetic about their frustration about not having the keys and still hold on to your keys – and your boundary.
With babies and toddlers you put boundaries in place by physically picking the child up and removing them from what you do not want them to do or disturb. This must be done respectfully. Respecting a child is not ‘spoiling’ them.
For example, you might say, ‘I cannot let you tease the dog, so I’m going to pick you up and carry you away from the dog.’ Even if your child has not learned to speak yet, your kind and firm tone and you physically removing them from what they are doing will gradually teach them that you disapprove of the activity they were engaged in.
Or it might be: ‘I carried you out of the room because you cannot make a noise when someone is making a speech.’ They might not understand what you say, but they will begin to learn on an embodied level what is and what isn’t appropriate. If a child is using a toy keyboard as a weapon, you might show them and tell them that keyboards are for playing on, not for hitting with or throwing. Then you might say, ‘Unless you play on the keyboard instead of hitting with it, I will have to take it away.’ And then, if the inappropriate behaviour continues, you take it away.
Speak calmly, kindly and firmly, do what you said you would do and be consistent. The advantage of not issuing empty threats, of following through with a physical removal, is that your child really does learn to take you seriously. You are a person who means what they say. What surprised me about using this approach was that, by the time the child grows too big for you to be able to physically remove them from the situation, they have learned that you mean what you say, and so they do as instructed, as if you could still pick them up. If you are past the being-able-to-pick-them-up stage, it is important to put down boundaries by defining yourself, not defining them and not getting into reason wars (see below, pp. 216–18). Remember: you are both on the same side.
You both want them and you to be content. The way to achieve this is to listen and empathize with their feelings, to contain their frustration and to learn when to be firm (when your own limit is being approached, or when their safety is at stake, or, more usually, when your fears about their safety are more than you can tolerate) and when to be flexible. You can be flexible when, for example, a change in plans or expectations won’t jeopardize anything in the long run, when you are being firm for the sake of keeping up appearances, when you are veering towards manipulating rather than relating with your child. As I was typing this, I was listening with one ear to some children playing in a neighbour’s garden.
They were getting more and more boisterous and began to sound as though they were on the edge of hysteria. Then I heard an adult address them: ‘I am finding your noise too much for me. You can either play quietly out here or you will have to come in.’ I loved her firm yet calm voice and I felt safer, as though I had been one of those children who was losing control and needed a boundary. After a while they got noisier again and she came out and said in a firmer voice,
‘Right, inside now,’ and in they all trooped. They knew she meant it.
Framing your boundaries with as little negativity as possible also helps. So instead of ‘Don’t paint on the walls,’ say, ‘Walls are not for painting on, paper is for painting on. Here is some paper.’ In the following example of a repair after a rupture, Aoife’s mum, Gina, learned to do just this with her toddler.
We just had a lovely moment. Aoife was washing her hands after painting and she filled a bowl with water and put it really carefully on the side. I said, ‘You were so careful then,
Aoife’ and she said, ‘Yes, I was’ – then she hugged me. I realized instead of being positive, I’m usually saying, ‘Don’t spill the water,’ ‘Don’t make the floor wet.’ Her hug was my reward for my good parenting behaviour.

At first, boundaries are about keeping your child safe. We might say, ‘Play in the garden, not the road, as the road is not safe.’ Then they are about considering the environment and other people. Often, when parents put down a boundary, we pretend it is not about defining ourselves. We say things like, ‘You’ve got to turn off the television at the end of this programme because you’ve watched too much.’ By doing that, you are defining the child. No one likes to be defined or told what they need when they don’t think they need it. In this case, what you really mean is ‘I don’t want the television on any more so I will be turning it off after this.’ It is not only okay to self-define rather than pretend to them (and to yourself) that you are being objective, it is good modelling for them. You are showing them that you are listening to your feelings, working out what you want from what you feel, then you are going for it. This is key to staying sane.
You may have read that it’s not good for children to have more than one hour’s screen time a day so you might feel you are stating an objective fact when you tell them they’ve watched too much and so they must turn it off. But it might not feel like too much to them, so you may be inviting an unwelcome game of fact tennis. So, define yourself, give your boundary with an I-statement, say how you feel: ‘I am not comfortable with you watching any more television, so I am switching it off after the end of this programme. Would you like to play something else, or help me cook the supper?’
Losing your temper with your child can traumatize them and close them down. So it’s much better to know your limits and to be firm about a boundary before you get to that limit. The boundary is when you stop the behaviour, and the limit is when you blow a fuse if the boundary has not been put down.
So, if you lose your cool after overhearing two hours of YouTube memes or cartoons, two hours is your limit, so you need to set the boundary before two hours. Boundaries benefit the person we give them to but they are also for the benefit of the person laying down the boundary, and we should not pretend otherwise.
If you pretend that you have worthy reasons for a boundary, you are teaching your children to hide their real feelings behind worthy reasons. This will make communication with them more difficult, as they will get good at the game of inventing worthy reasons rather than sharing how they feel. Having the more difficult parenting conversations – about sex and porn, about social media, about stress and pressures and feelings – will be much harder unless your habit from the start has been clear communication and you’re in the habit of talking about your own feelings and listening to their feelings and taking them seriously.
If you make up reasons for boundaries, even when they sound reasonable you will get into all sorts of difficulties. ‘But Daddy lets me stay up until eight o’clock and you’re saying I have to go to bed at seven thirty?’ ‘Who is right?’ the child will wonder. The truth in such a situation might be: ‘Daddy doesn’t mind if you stay up until eight, and I do. And tonight I want you in bed by seven thirty because there is a programme I want to watch at eight, undisturbed.’
We owe our children honesty, so that means sharing our feelings with them rather than pretending we don’t have any. Our feelings and personal preferences inevitably come into a decision like what time they should go to bed, and we must not pretend they don’t.
Likewise, children may resent it if rules seem petty. In one family, their eldest child was autistic. He needed to know what was going to happen and when, and it had to happen then and it had to be the same every day. The parents brought up their subsequent two sons with the same routine and rules because they felt it would be ‘unfair’ if they allowed the younger children flexibility they hadn’t allowed their first. ‘John had to go to bed at eight when he was twelve, so you do too,’ they’d say. If you are that inflexible and refuse to see each child as an individual, they may gradually store up resentment against you or against their sibling. And storing up resentment is storing up trouble.
The rule of thumb for setting a boundary is to define yourself and not the child. For example, suppose your child is playing music really loudly and it’s disturbing you. They are absorbed and enjoying themselves. You, on the other hand, are beginning to feel resentful. In other words, you are approaching your limit. Define yourself, describing how you feel rather than defining your child.
Say: ‘I’m finding this music too loud. I would like you to turn it down, please,’ rather than, ‘Your music is too loud, turn it down, please.’
My parents never defined themselves when they gave me commands or put down boundaries, and I remember that it felt frustrating. I might not have been able to put my finger on why at the time, but something felt not quite real about it and it made me feel angry and lonely.
I decided that, when I had a child, I would do things differently. I would be honest. I would tell the truth. That’s not to say it didn’t feel like a risk to own my selfishness when I told my daughter I was cold and bored and that was why I wanted to leave the playground, but it turned out well. By modelling and saying how I felt and then saying what I wanted, my daughter learned to do the same thing. And we did not get into reason wars.
What is a reason war? A reason war is when you play fact tennis and pretend that feelings don’t come into a decision at all, then it escalates to a war or stand- off. For example:

ADULT We have to go because we have to make lunch.
CHILD No, we don’t. We can eat the leftovers.
ADULT It’s time to go home for lunch now, anyway.
CHILD I’m not hungry, and there are apples in the bag, if you are.
ADULT You need a proper lunch and we’re going home and that’s that.
CHILD Whaaaaaaaaaaah!

If you often find yourself locked into battles like this, it’s because you’ve taught your child the rules of fact tennis. You might think it’s better or less selfish-sounding to give a reason that involves them (‘It’s time for your lunch!’), but if it’s not the real reason you want to leave the playground – say, the real reason is that you want your own lunch – you are giving them too much space to argue with you. There’s no arguing with you wanting your own lunch.
The way to get out of reason wars is to describe how you feel and say what you want. It is easier to negotiate when everyone shares their feelings instead of pretending everything is about a reason.
So, instead, try this approach:

ADULT We have to go now because I want my lunch.
CHILD I don’t want to go.
ADULT I’m sorry you don’t want to go, but I’ll get grumpy if I don’t have lunch.
I’ll give you two more minutes to finish your game and then we’re going.

And then you follow through.
I remember being very pleasantly surprised one day when I told my daughter I was getting cold and bored in the playground so we’d be leaving in five minutes and she negotiated down on my behalf, saying, ‘We can go in two if you like!’
A child who is respected by being listened to and having their feelings taken seriously has less inclination to act out their frustrations and is more likely to want to get along with you and to learn how to empathize. A child who isn’t listened to enough will be more demanding. With very young children, it takes many years until a small person can articulate themselves clearly so you’ll need to listen by observing. Here is a case study to illustrate what I mean.
My son, Paul, who is six, has speech and language difficulties that are probably related to autism, but we have had no formal diagnosis. When he was a baby and a toddler, the house sometimes felt like a war zone.
Once my partner and I started trying to understand life from his perspective, all our lives got better. We had to put a lot of time and effort into watching and listening to learn from him. He taught us patience. What we learned is when we can nudge him a little further and when to back off. We also have a daughter, who is two years older than him.
Because she is more like we are in the way she works, we didn’t have to puzzle her out as much. But while we were learning about our son, we started to observe and listen better to our daughter too. Although she was always lovely to be around, we’ve noticed that, as we have become more considerate of her, she has become more considerate of us.
