# The importance of accepting every mood

If someone asked you what you’d wish for your child, you’d probably reply, ‘I want them to be happy.’ It is no bad thing to want your children to have a capacity for happiness. But do we perhaps have too much invested in the idea of
‘happy’, in a perfect picture of your family having a perfect time, gambolling in the meadow, having a lovely picnic among the wild flowers?
Happiness, like all feelings, comes and goes. In fact, if you were happy all the time, you’d hardly know it because you wouldn’t have other emotional states to compare it to. And for a child to be happy it’s necessary for parents to accept all their moods and all aspects of how they experience their world. It will be no picnic for much of the time.
It isn’t possible to be scolded, or even distracted, into happiness. The more fully you accept and love your child no matter what their experience is and how they feel about it, the more capacity for happiness they will have. This goes for you as well as for your children. We need to accept ourselves and all our moods as well.
I remember one of my parents’ friends asked me, when I was twelve years old, whether I was having a happy childhood. I told him, ‘No, not really, no. I d0 not feel particularly happy much of the time.’ My father overheard this and turned angrily to remonstrate with me. ‘What nonsense,’ he said. ‘You have an idyllic childhood, a very happy childhood. What rubbish.’ And, because he was my father – my beloved, if scary, father – I felt I must have been mistaken. I felt confused, unsure of my own feelings.
Parents tend to take it for granted that what they think would make them happy will make their children happy, but this isn’t necessarily the case – as you have most likely found out. You may feel like a failure if your child seems unhappy and rather than feeling such an uncomfortable feeling, you may, like my father, have tried to scold your children into happiness.
If I knew then what I know now, when my father contradicted me I would have been able to make more sense of what I was feeling, but at the time my brain just went into an unclear, confused fug. It’s the fug I feel when I feel something but someone I look up to tells me I do not have that emotion. And in the fug there was also shame, because I had got something – I was never clear what – wrong, and wrong again.
What my father missed was an opportunity to connect with me, maybe not at that moment but after his guest had gone. He could have asked me what I was feeling and not taken the answer, whatever it may have been, as though it were an attack on him. He could have helped me to articulate it and he could have tried to see the world as I saw it. I’m not saying he had to change his view of the world, but he could have tried to see that my viewpoint too was a valid way of seeing things and of seeing myself.
If you treat your child’s sadness, anger and fears not as negatives to be corrected but as opportunities to learn more about them and to connect with them, then you will deepen your bond with them. Then, there is every likelihood you will increase their capacity for happiness.
If you came home and said to your partner, ‘I had a foul day at work,’ and they replied, ‘It can’t have been that bad,’ you probably wouldn’t feel seen, heard or met by them. You might even feel batted away. If this is the sort of response you habitually get, you might give up confiding in them.
If your partner said instead, ‘Tell me about it,’ and you did, if you told them how unfair your boss had been and how you had to do everything twice because of her carelessness, and if they said, ‘No wonder you feel you had a bad day,’ you might begin to feel a bit better.
If, on the other hand, your partner started their reply with something like,
‘Well, you should …’ and gave you advice, you would probably feel worse. If your partner replied by saying, ‘Look at that cute squirrel out of the window,’ you might well stop talking about work, because what would be the point of going on and saying any more? The squirrel might help you forget you are unhappy, but the feelings, not having been worked through, would return.
Remember this: when your baby, or your child, your adult child or even your partner confides a painful feeling, although it might feel that you are making it worse by acknowledging it, you will in fact be helping them work through their emotions and so making it better.
It may be easy enough to be sympathetic with your child about a bad day at school. But what if you really do not like what they are saying? For example: ‘I don’t like the baby, I want you to take her back to the hospital.’ Then, it is even more important to listen, to try to understand and to validate how they feel. Say,
‘You have really been missing out on time with just you and me lately, no wonder you want the baby to go away,’ or, ‘It’s not fair that all the visitors coo over the baby and seem to not pay enough attention to you.’ Or even, ‘What does it feel like now you are a brother?’ Whatever the answer, accept it. You cannot tell a child that they love their sibling. They are aware of how they feel and they need a safe container for those feelings.
