# When parents are together

If you are caring for your child with a co-parent, the love, goodwill, caring and respect between you will contribute to your child’s sense of security. And yet, as anyone who’s had a child knows, it puts a strain on your relationship.
Spontaneity may be compromised, time alone with your partner or other people you feel close to diminished, time on your own reduced or disappear completely.
Your or your partner’s relationship with sex may change, and opportunities for sex will happen less often. Sleep patterns will be disrupted and it is likely that you will have to manage on significantly less sleep; each member of a couple, or of a wider extended family, may have different parenting philosophies and the dynamics within the relationships may shift. Your work habits will change and, if you stop paid work, that may alter how you see yourself too. There will be an effect on your social life; there may be less or no contact with former colleagues; some friends may seem to recede for a while due to your preoccupation with your baby; and so on.
And this is by no means an exhaustive list. If you are in a couple, the transition from that partnership to becoming a family takes some getting used to. And just when you think you’ve got used to it, it changes again, as your child and/or your family continues to grow. These changes can also contribute to the resentment you may experience towards each other and towards your child. By the way, it’s better to admit any resentment, even if only to yourself. If you don’t, you are more likely to justify acting out of that feeling rather than taking responsibility for it.
Life is never static and being able to accept, work with and embrace change is more useful than resisting it. Thinking about how you can be flexible may be more effective than trying to regain what was lost. This doesn’t mean you won’t miss your old life sometimes. And it does mean you may need to work at surrendering to your new one and embracing it. Remember Mark on p. 19; he resented the way in which his life was turned upside down by the change from being a couple to becoming a family of three and he learned to accept that change by tracing the source of his resentment to his own upbringing and finding meaning in childcare rather than just writing it off as a boring chore. He also found that when he accepted joint and equal responsibility for his child with his partner, this freed her up to be more of her old self again, rather than being wholly preoccupied with her baby.
