# Children's lies

I was at a welcome talk for new parents at my daughter’s secondary school and the headteacher, Margaret Connell, looked at all of us parents and gave it to us straight. She said, ‘Your child will lie to you.’ I thought, ‘Oh, not my daughter, we have a great relationship.’ She went on, ‘Even if you think your daughter tells you everything, she will lie to you as she enters adolescence, and your job,’ she told us, ‘is not to make a stonking big deal of it.’
When I asked Margaret about this years later she told me this: ‘Everybody lies. Of all the bad things we do, lying is the most common and the one we think least about. But, for some reason, parents seem to put this sin above all sins. If the child has done something they shouldn’t have, maybe something relatively trivial, and she says she didn’t do it, the parents then say, “I know my daughter, she has her faults, but she wouldn’t lie.” And the problem is, this puts the child into a corner and it means, whatever the matter is, you never reach an end of it.’
All children lie; all adults lie too. It’s great when we don’t, because it gives us a better chance to have proper dialogue and real intimacy. But we all do it and we shouldn’t treat our children like the greatest sinners when they do too.
After all, we give our children very mixed messages about lying and when it’s acceptable in our culture. We tell them not to lie, but then we also tell them to pretend to be grateful for an ugly scarf Granny has knitted them for Christmas for the third year running. If you think about it, children have to learn a complicated lesson about when it is appropriate to lie.
Children witness their parents telling lies all the time. They’ll have overheard you ask your partner, for example, to tell his colleagues you can’t come to the work reception when the correct version is that you don’t want to go. There is no reason for your children to believe you will never lie to them if they have witnessed you behaving like this, with perfect power to persuade other people that the truth is other than it is.
If you think about lying, it is an accomplished thing for a child to do. Firstly, they have to conceive of an alternative reality and say, ‘This happened.’ Then they must keep that in their mind along with what really happened. And they must distinguish between both in order to properly lie and then – and this is the really clever bit – they also have to bear in mind what you are thinking and what you know.
A toddler may indulge in deceitful behaviour, like feeding the dog behind your back with something they don’t fancy eating, but they don’t really begin to lie in the way I described above until they reach the age of about four. Then they feel that they’ve got a new superpower. ‘Wow, I can make stuff up and people will believe me! This is amazing!’
Quite often, children lie because the adults in their life would not be calm and unjudgemental about the truth. Some children tell lies to get out of trouble, others are fantasy lies or lies to please grown-ups or to do others a good turn.
Sometimes children tell a lie to tell an emotional truth. When they are asked what’s wrong and they do not know how to explain, they invent a narrative to fit their feelings.
One day at nursery school when Flo was aged three, she did not seem her usual bouncy self. The teacher asked her if anything was wrong. She replied,
‘My goldfish has died.’ At pick-up, the teacher told me about that conversation and I said, ‘Er, but we have never had a goldfish.’
Thinking about it, I realized she was telling a kind of truth. My beloved aunt had died, and I had naturally been upset about this. Flo would have seen me cry; maybe I was not as interested in what she was absorbed by; maybe I didn’t hear when she talked to me; and generally, although I was there physically, I was not as available and present with her. Maybe she was missing what I was normally like to the value of one goldfish? Or, more likely, she could handle and conceive of the death of a goldfish, but this massive, terrible thing of my bereavement needed to be reduced to the value of one goldfish for her to be able to handle it. I told the teacher what I thought had really happened.
It can be easier for a child to hold on to a fantasy than to handle the truth, and we need to respect that. The more we continue to put our feelings, and our children’s feelings, into words, the less they will have to lie to get their emotional truth across to us. This takes years to learn.
Sometimes their fantasy lie is a form of self-soothing and we must, as with all aberrant behaviour, look to understand the feelings behind the behaviour rather than condemn the child for committing it. If they cannot take in the enormity of it, like my daughter could not take in my aunt’s death, they will break it down into a goldfish or whatever their equivalent is.
And there are yet more reasons your older child will lie. As you may have predicted, Miss Connell’s wise words came true and Flo did lie to me, when she was fifteen. When I found out, I remembered Miss Connell’s words and did not treat this as the greatest tragedy ever to descend upon me.
Instead, I listened to my daughter’s explanation. She and a friend each told their parents that they were revising at the other’s house but instead they went to the local university’s student union bar.
I really listened when she said that she had to lie because I would never have let her go there! That much was true, I told her, I wouldn’t have – because it was illegal: she was not only under age to drink, it was a private bar which they weren’t entitled to use.
But, I said, the real reason I wouldn’t have allowed her to go there was because I was scared. I was scared because, when I was fifteen, I had similar adventures and didn’t tell my parents about them. And, looking back on my own escapades, I did put myself in danger and was just lucky I got away with it.
I told her I wasn’t yet ready to let her put herself in the sort of danger I’d put myself in at her age, drinking too much and trying to impress people who were older and who I saw as more sophisticated than I was, of losing my head in the moment. I told her she’d have to wait until I felt confident to allow her to do things like that, and I said I could understand if she felt frustrated by that.
Indeed, the following year I did feel confident enough to give her more freedom.
When Flo was sixteen I let her camp at a pop festival with a group of her peers, and no harm came to any of them. We did have conversations before she went where I shared my fears: What are you going to do when your phone has died and you’ve lost your friends? How can you tell if an offered drug poses a risk?
(A very cunning trick question on my part.) Her answers were sensible enough.
Now Flo is an adult she can enjoy scaring me with some of the things she omitted to mention at the time. Apparently, by 3 a.m., theirs was the only tent not on fire, so she and her friend left the site, walked miles to the train station and slept there. A marvellous adventure for a pair of sixteen-year-olds. Flo felt she couldn’t tell me at the time because she enjoyed having that secret for a while.
It’s better if you don’t overreact to what your child does and tells you, as not overreacting makes it more likely that you will keep the lines of communication open. I had perhaps erred by overreacting with my fears, veering too far from the ideal of containment, which is why she deemed me unready to hear this story until years later.
When parenting a teenager, remember what it was like to be a teenager yourself, straining at the restrictions your parents put in place to try to stop their fears coming true. Adolescents do need to keep some things, like that relatively harmless tale of my daughter’s, private. They need this privacy in order to forge their separate identity. Teenagers may also lie, or lie by omission, to create space for themselves. It isn’t that they are necessarily up to something tremendously bad; they’re up to something that they may want to keep for themselves or in their friendship group because they are separating from the tribe of family and parents and forming their own new tribe.
What you’re aiming for is to keep those lines of communication open from babyhood to adulthood. It’s important that children feel they can tell you the truth, that all their feelings will be accepted, even – or rather, especially – those feelings and attitudes you find inconvenient. If you are not a safe person to talk to, who can they turn to when, for example, they are being bullied at school, or feel spooked by the sexual overtones of their judo instructor? You need to contain a child’s feelings and not overreact to what they show or tell you by not being judgemental and by getting them to brainstorm possible solutions to problems rather than immediately telling them what they should be doing. We have been around longer than them, and sometimes when they tell us something it is tempting to tell them what they should do, but, if possible, hold back, so that you instil confidence in your child rather than disempowering them. If you are a sounding board rather than always an oracle, your child is more likely to keep telling you the truth.
If a child lies – or engages in any other behaviour you’d rather change – instead of reacting, look to the reasons and feelings behind the lie or the behaviour. If you understand and validate those feelings, you give them a chance to find more acceptable ways of expressing themselves and their needs.
Margaret Connell told me about a pupil of hers. ‘I had a pupil once who, whenever there was a disaster in the world, she had a relation in it. Whether it was an earthquake or a train crash, she had a second cousin or a brother-in-law or a family friend in it. After a while it dawned on me that this was not entirely likely, and that she was driven to lie to get attention and get sympathy, probably because she couldn’t or hadn’t been allowed to ask for attention and sympathy in a straightforward way. So she invented these unlikely scenarios based on whatever that day’s news was.’
To get to the root of the problem, it is important to go beyond the lies and find out what is lacking in that child’s life, or what is happening, or has happened, to them that they need such sympathy and attention. And also what is happening that they have to take such a roundabout route to secure it.
You may think, yes, but lying is still wrong. But having a stern, moralistic approach towards lying does not make children more truthful. In fact, research shows that it makes children more accomplished at lying.
Researcher Victoria Talwar visited two schools in West Africa with similar pupil intakes but very different disciplinary regimes. One was roughly equivalent to a typical Western school: if you did something wrong, maybe lied or didn’t do your work very well, you would get guidance about how to act next time in a chat with a teacher and perhaps a detention. The other school was punitive: the children were taken out and beaten for misdemeanours.
Talwar was interested to see which regime would be better at raising a truthful child so she did an experiment with the children called the peeping game. She invited a child into the room and said, ‘You sit here, facing the wall. I’m going to bring out three objects behind you. You have to guess from the noise it makes what each object is.’ With the third object, she played a trick and gave it a completely different noise, for example the noise of a greetings-card birthday tune when the object was a football.
Before she asked for the child’s answer, she said, ‘I’ve just got to pop out of the room for a moment. Don’t peek!’ When she came back, she said, ‘You didn’t peek, did you?’ The child invariably replied, ‘No.’ Then she asked, ‘What was the third object? Could you guess from the noise?’ The child almost always said,
‘It’s a football.’ Because they had peeked. They almost all peeked.
Talwar then asked, ‘How did you know that? Did you peek?’ And at that point she could measure how much and how effectively the children lied. In the school with the not-so-strict regime, some children lied, some didn’t; it was around the same ratio she’d found when she did the test in other countries. But the children in the school with the punitive regime were all incredibly quick to lie, and they all lied very convincingly. So, unwittingly, by cracking down hard on lying, the school had become a machine for turning out highly effective liars – something my daughter’s headteacher, Margaret Connell, had known all along.
When your child lies – and I say ‘when’ and not ‘if ’ – remember all the reasons for lying. It’s a developmental stage, they are copying you, they are creating their own private space, they’re lying to communicate a feeling, to avoid punishment or to avoid upset. If the lying is a problem, it’s better to problem-solve and find out what’s behind the lie rather than being punitive. That will only make your child into a better liar.
The more judgemental you are, the more punitive you are, the more you will stop your child confiding in you. They will still want to please you, to get your approval, but they will do it by putting aside honesty, by putting aside their real self, perhaps at the expense of their mental health. A draconian regime does not turn out good, moral citizens. Nor is it likely to help them have a mutually rewarding relationship with you, which in turn may jeopardize their ability to form sustaining, satisfying relationships in life.
Remember Margaret Connell’s words: ‘Your child will lie and your job is not to make a stonking big deal of it.’
