# What happens when you're addicted to your phone

If you’re physically close to your child but are missing their cues because, say, you are on your phone or computer, it will trouble them. Think how you feel when you go out with a friend and they spend too much of your time together on their phone. Annoying, right? Because you have, more or less, already formed your personality, it isn’t going to damage you, although it won’t help the relationship. Your child, however, is in the process of forming their personality and their habits in relationship with you.
We know that alcoholics and drug addicts do not make the best parents because their priority is always the substance they’re addicted to, so their children are denied a lot of the attention they need. I’d say phone addicts are not so far behind. I do not recommend playing or checking emails on your phone in front of a young child for long periods of time. Not only will you be depriving them of contact, you will be creating an empty space inside them. And not to be dramatic, but this is the sort of empty space that may make addicts of people later in life, when they try to fill it with addictive substances or compulsive activities to stop a feeling of being disconnected – feeling empty – haunting them.
You also risk your child becoming addicted to a screen too, as a replacement for contact. You may get more of an instant sense of connection from a screen than from meaningful contact with another person – but it is not a viable substitute.
You may well be attached to your phone because of your need for contact.
Well, your child has the same need for contact, but more intensely, because they need contact with you to connect up their brain. People do not develop normally in isolation. People need people.
Anyone who cares for your baby or child needs to know this about screens too, whether it’s a nanny, a childminder, a friend or a relative. If you or they are always staring at a screen, your child will want a screen to stare at too. If you have suddenly realized on reading this that you often ignore your child, do not think, ‘I have ruined them for life,’ because you haven’t. Simply by stopping and making the space for them instead, you can repair your relationship.
