# The initial bond

Throughout your pregnancy, your body has been telling your baby your story and the story of your environment, through what you have been feeling, what you’ve eaten, the sounds that surround you and which come from your body. Once your baby is on the outside of your body, that story continues.
Many parents feel an instant connection and rush of love for their newborn, like Emma.
I was worried I wouldn’t bond with my baby, John, as I’ve never been particularly interested in anyone else’s. But as soon as he was put on me I knew he was gorgeous and I loved him fiercely. My labour lasted ten hours. I walked a lot and I used a birthing stool, which worked for me. It was painful but, as contractions come in waves, I did get a rest between each one. I think knowing to expect that helped a lot. I had a bit of gas and air towards the end. After John was born I felt sorry for the other mothers because their babies weren’t as beautiful as mine! I didn’t realize, because it felt such a special and unique experience, that most mothers think and feel as I did. I didn’t know the other mothers were probably idolizing their own infant and pitying me!

A reaction like Emma’s is probably due to a rush of the ‘love hormone’ oxytocin. Some drugs given during birth, or being shocked or traumatized by the birth, may interfere with the release of oxytocin – which may mean that this rush of love, as Emma describes it, is absent for you.
That was Mia’s experience.
My baby, Lucca, was induced. The birth was extremely painful, the worst pain I have ever had. I couldn’t have an epidural because the anaesthetist couldn’t get the needle in.
When Lucca was born, I didn’t feel anything except shock. My mother was with me, and I made her hold him because, I don’t know why, I just wasn’t ready. Then he was taken to the special-care baby unit for a day.
Those first two weeks I had difficulty even believing he was my son. I seriously thought about having a DNA test because I was sure he had got mixed up at the unit.
Anyway, thank god for Mum. She listened to me and my worries calmly and didn’t argue with what I felt. And she told me I wouldn’t always feel like that. Mum stayed with us for a month. She’d say things like, ‘Oh, Lucca has your eyes,’ and ‘He’s so like you were as a baby.’ And gradually I began to bond with him.
It wasn’t until Lucca was about six months old that I feel our bond really cemented. I was holding him in the pool at a baby swimming class and he was hitting the water with his fist. He looked up at me and laughed – and we laughed together.
Those first few months were hard, I can’t lie. I felt I was ‘acting as if’ we were bonded and it got me through, but it also got me down.

Don’t believe that you are a freak or somehow the ‘only one’ who feels how you feel after the birth. What you need is someone to listen to and accept how you feel so you can accept your feelings too. You need to accept where you are rather than berate yourself for not being where you think you should be. This was key in Mia’s progress in forming a bond with Lucca. Mia’s mother did not argue with her or tell her she was wrong to feel how she did but simply acknowledged it.
Exercise: How does your baby feel?
Lie on the floor. Imagine what it is like to feel lonely, hungry, thirsty, uncomfortable in this position yet to have no words – no words to think with and no words to communicate with. Imagine what it is like just to be body and feelings, unable to sit up or roll over or feel that you belong. All you can do is lie there and be your feelings. Now imagine what it feels like to be rescued, to be picked up, made comfortable, held close and to feel part of someone else, although you still have no words, no past, no future, just now and body and feelings.
