# Sympathetic magic

How do our relationships with our children generally begin? As soon as you announce you’re pregnant, you are given a barrage of advice about how to eat, what not to drink – and generally what not to do. The actual advice differs according to the culture and the time, but this process – of being given a lot of advice – is pretty much the same.
Such a large number of rules and advice to be followed may give you the impression that there is such a thing as an optimal pregnancy … which may unwittingly lead you to assume there’s such a thing as a perfect parent who produces an impeccable child.
I believe this way of thinking may interfere with our relationship with our children, not help it. Believing that pregnancy, childbirth and parenting can be somehow optimized puts us in danger of bringing into the world an object to be perfected rather than a person to relate to. It would be better, rather than giving in to overbearing, impossible perfection, if we realized that pregnancy and parenthood are not projects. They are, instead, as I keep saying, about bringing into the world a person with whom you are going to have a lifelong liking and loving relationship.
There’s a second reason you may want to think about how you react to all the rules and advice you may be given about pregnancy. Obeying all the rules and taking all the precautions we’re advised to, although some of them may indeed be helpful, can give a false feeling of control over pregnancy or what chromosomes and diseases we pass down to our child.
Think about it like this: there are so many rules about pregnancy, and they vary from culture to culture. But it can really put parents into a panic if they feel they haven’t followed the advice they are given to the letter. In the UK, for example, you will be given advice about avoiding unpasteurized milk products.
If you digested some before you knew you were pregnant, you may panic that you’ve contracted some ghastliness that will hurt your baby.
Some risks you will be warned about; some you won’t. The reality is, it’s impossible to have a completely safe pregnancy. Pregnancy is, by its nature, a risk. You may have a child who is different from most children and therefore does not fit into this draconian category of ‘perfect’ – but you are creating a person to love, not a work of art.
Some cultures, like the Kaliai people in Papua New Guinea, believe that for a pregnancy to be successful the couple need to have sexual intercourse as much as possible up to and possibly during labour. The Kaliai also believe that if a pregnant woman eats flying fox, a common meal in their culture, the child will be mentally defective or tremble in the way the flying fox shakes.
You’ll find such customs and taboos throughout the world. Anthropologists call this ‘sympathetic magic’: symptoms are connected to something the mother ate or did during her pregnancy or lactation period. Whatever rules you’re being told to follow, whether they are scientifically proven medical ones or folklore, they’ll be different depending on where you live in the world, and they continue to change. I’m not suggesting you should ignore medical advice, but do consider how it makes you feel.
You might be delighted with this research from Yale University: pregnant women who in the last third of their pregnancy ate five or more portions of chocolate a week had a 40 per cent lower risk of developing pre-eclampsia. And, apparently, there are more reasons to eat chocolate. In 2004, Katri Räikkönen at the University of Helsinki researched the association between the amount of chocolate mothers ate during pregnancy and their baby’s behaviour. When the babies were six months old, their behaviour was rated in various categories, including fear, how easily soothed they were, how often they smiled and laughed. The babies born to women who had been eating chocolate daily during pregnancy were more active and smiled and laughed more. They also measured the stress levels of the mothers. The babies of stressed women who consumed chocolate regularly showed less fear in new situations than the babies of stressed women who did not do so.
The trouble with any advice is that, if it comes too late for you, you may feel you’ve done your baby some harm. The chocolate advice came too late for me. I don’t regularly eat chocolate and my baby laughed frequently anyway.
Sympathetic magic, be it medically proven or traditional, can be reassuring when we do follow it and panic inducing when we do not. As I said before, we have less control over pregnancy than we may find it comfortable to believe.
Extreme stress (sometimes called toxic stress) caused by trauma, such as ongoing physical danger in pregnancy, does adversely affect the development of the unborn child, as does malnutrition and, of course, we all avoid such things if we can. Normal stress, like having a difficult job or working through our differences with people, will probably not affect your foetus.
There is a risk you might have a child with an abnormality or that the child might not survive. And there is very likely nothing you could have done about this, no magic that could have prevented it, whether it’s avoiding eating flying fox or whatever rule you think you have broken.
The sympathetic magic I think is most helpful is to think of your experience of pregnancy as affecting the foetus, as though the environment of the womb is telling the baby a story of what they will find after they are born. So, if you enjoy yourself, feel relaxed, eat well and feel optimistic, the story you will be telling them is one that they, and you, will want to continue after the birth.
One way to begin this story is to notice how being given all this pregnancy advice makes you feel. When appropriate, steer those feelings from fear to optimism. I believe it helps if we don’t think about our unborn child as something that might go wrong. I don’t think that’s the way to necessarily build the best foundation for a mutually satisfying relationship with this new person.
We get into habits about the way we think about people, and your foetus is the beginnings of an individual person.
Concentrate on what can go right, not the scary stories you hear. Oh, and the same goes for people’s difficult birth stories. Being in a good mood will affect your unborn child. Looking in the direction you want to head in rather than concentrating on where you don’t want to go will make your outlook more positive and serve as a better foundation for your relationship. (Besides, if the worst does happen, having been terrified that it might won’t alleviate any grief.)
The habit of optimism where our children are concerned is necessary. For their sakes, we need to believe they’ll develop and learn and get the hang of things. I know how much easier it is for me to achieve anything when someone I look up to believes in me, and I’m sure I’m not a freak to feel like this. I couldn’t have attempted this book, for example, if my literary agent hadn’t believed in me. In the same way, your child needs you to believe in them so they can thrive. And you can get into this habit of optimism during pregnancy.
Before you meet a new person you may hear about them from other people.
You begin to form a picture of this person before you’ve even begun to know them for yourself. Think about the influence what you’ve heard has on what you think about this person. We may like to think that we reserve judgement until we have met them and know them for ourselves but, in my experience, most of us do not.
In her book Origins, Annie Murphy Paul describes an experiment in which 120 pregnant women were asked to describe the movements of their foetuses. If the women knew they were expecting a boy or a girl, it made a significant difference to the language they used to describe the movements they felt. Key words used for female foetuses were ‘gentle’, ‘rolling’ and ‘quiet’, whereas for boys the words were ‘energetic’, ‘vigorous’ and ‘jabbing’. The language of women who didn’t know the sex of their baby didn’t follow these clichéd patterns. This is just one area we need to be self-aware about in order not to lumber the child with expectations of what they are like before they’re here.
Instead, we need to get into the habit of observing rather than judging.
How you are thinking about your unborn baby will also influence your future bond with them. If you get into a habit of thinking about your foetus as a parasite, a wilful invader, a burden, or as an imaginary friend, a living god or something in between, it may well make a difference to your later relationship with your child. It will also influence whether you are apprehensive about meeting your baby or, as I hope you are, looking forward to it.
Exercise: How are you thinking about your baby?
Observe yourself as you think about your unborn baby. Think about the way you are thinking about them and how it may influence your future relationship. This will put you in a better position to make a choice about how you begin to relate to this person you have not yet met.
Talk to your foetus, out loud, to help you strengthen your bond. Foetuses can hear from eighteen weeks’ gestation. You will hear yourself and understand how you are relating to this person, which can help you become more aware about what you are bringing to this relationship. It will start the habit of talking to your baby once they are born too, as well as the habit of seeing them as another person.
